Previously, we defined the client server model and
began reviewing some of the differences between this and peer to peer networks.
In this video, we'll explore the differences between these networks in more depth.
We'll look at how they operate using five different categories;
infrastructure, cost, control, security, and stability.
This will help you better understand when you should use a certain type of network,
why it's best suited for a given circumstance,
and how to apply it to your application.
To start, let's look at the infrastructure of each.
As we saw previously,
the client-server model is generally a centralized model.
While it's network may contain many servers,
they're usually owned by a single corporation.
This is different than a peer-to-peer.
Here, the network is distributed across all the users in the network.
Each of these users, known as nodes,
are responsible for acting as both the clients and the servers.
Next, let's look at the cost of each of these models.
The client server model is more expensive upfront than a peer-to-peer.
To make it client-server model work,
you need to have a significant enough amount of
availability to serve all the requests you're receiving.
It's on you to make sure they're accounting for all of this and
have the appropriate resources needed to keep things up and running.
There are options available to make using the service cheaper,
such as cloud service providers that allow you to access their server space.
This is an alternative route that you can use for an application,
but we're only really considering the cost here as the cost of
setting up those original servers that you'd be borrowing space from.
With a peer-to-peer, the load is distributed across all the nodes that join the network.
You can join a peer-to-peer right now using your local computer.
The cost of all the local computers being used to
support the network can definitely add up to be very expensive,
but in this case, both the load and the cost of
the network is being distributed across each of the nodes.
Next, when looking at the control of data,
it's pretty simple to see the difference and we've covered this a few times already.
In a client-server network,
the central authority that serving
the information has the authority to do whatever they like with it.
If YouTube doesn't want a video shown, they can delete it.
If Twitter thinks the user isn't following their guidelines, they can block them.
In a peer-to-peer network,
no one has the ability to do either of these things.
Everything on the network is owned and shared by everyone.
You can choose to leave the network, if you like,
but you can't be blocked deleted or removed by a central authority.
Next up is security.
How does this differ between the two types of networks?
Information security is a huge topic but for this comparison,
we're focusing specifically on security as it relates to
how easily someone can access the information on a network.
Since the client-server model is run by a central authority
with the ability to control permissions across the network,
it's generally considered to be much more secure.
In the peer-to-peer networks,
nodes are free to share data across
the network and any user will have access to this data.
As we've seen on the blockchain,
this can vary between public,
private, and hybrid blockchains.
It's important to note that just because peer to
peer isn't as secure as the client server model,
that doesn't mean that the blockchain isn't secure.
That's because the peer-to-peer itself
isn't what's contributing to the security of the blockchain.
The blockchain security comes from using private keys,
public keys, wallet addresses,
and cryptography, like we've seen before.
These security measures have all been added in to compensate for
the fact that a peer-to-peer alone doesn't guarantee security,
it just distributes the control.
Finally, the stability of the network varies across these network types.
Overall, a client-server model is generally considered more stable.
That's because the central owner can add or remove
computation and storage more easily to meet the demands of the clients.
A peer-to-peer network is generally less stable,
especially when it's getting started.
By depending on users to serve up information,
you're placing your stability in their hands.
If there are only five peers in the network
and three of them leave or the computers break,
you just lost 60 percent of your network's power.
Instability goes down as more nodes are added to the network.
If your network now has 1,000 nodes,
those same three nodes could crash but it wouldn't have as much impact.
That wraps up our overview of the peer-to-peer versus client-server model.
The goal here isn't to decide which is better overall,
but to understand the pros and cons of each
to determine which is a good fit for your application.
The application you build in this program,
we'll use a peer-to-peer model.
Take some time to consider what decisions you can make to best leverage the strengths
of this model and ways you can avoid some of the pitfalls with this technology.